In this video we'll learn about
passing arrays to c++ functions.
We can pass arrays into functions
by providing the square brackets
in the parameter information.
So in this case, we can have
a function named print array
that expects an array of
integers and returns nothing.
The idea is that this function
iterates through the array
and displays the array values.
Pretty handy function, right.
But arrays are different in c++.
Remember that an array name evaluates
to the address or location and memory
of the first element of the array.
In other words, the
beginning of the array.
So what's being passed into the
function is not a copy of the
entire array, but only the address
of the first element of the array.
That means that the function has no idea
how many elements are in the array.
So the programmer doesn't know
how many times to iterate.
So when we pass arrays to functions,
we also need to pass in the size
of the array, so that we now
know how many times to iterate.
Let me show you an example.
In this example, you can see
that both the function prototype
and the function definition
have square brackets after
the formal parameter name.
This tells the compiler that
the function expects an array
of integers in this case.
So far so good.
Then in main, I have an array
of five integers called my
numbers, and it's been initialized
to the integers 1 through 5.
So I call the print array function
and pass in the array my numbers.
All good so far.
Now I execute the
print array function.
But I have no idea how many
times I need to iterate.
Since the array name has no
size information, I'm stuck.
If the array has a sentinel
value, like a c-style string,
then I can iterate until
I see that sentinel value.
But in this case, the my numbers
array has no such sentinel value.
There's no way I can write this
function body in a way that it will
work with any array of integers.
So the solution is to pass in the size
of the array to the function as well.
Let's do that next.
Now we've added a size parameter
to both the function prototype
and the function definition.
In the main, when I call the function,
I pass in my numbers and the size of
the array which is 5 in this case.
Now when i execute the body of
the print array function, I know
the location of the array which
is the array name and I know how
many elements are in the array.
I can easily write a for loop
now that iterates through the
array and displays every integer.
This looks great but there
is one potential gotcha that
you need to be aware of.
Since we're passing into the function,
the location of the actual array
that was declared in main that
means that we can modify that actual
array from within the function.
This could be useful in the case
of a function like zero array that
we can call whenever we want to 0
out all the elements in an array.
However, in the print array function,
we don't want to modify the array.
If we do it's probably
an unintentional error.
We'll see how to protect ourselves
from this kind of error in the
next slide, but first let's
see how we could write a useful
function like zero array.
In this case the zero array function receives the location of the array
and the size of the array.
We could simply iterate
through the array and set
each array element to zero.
Notice that when we print the array
in main after we call zero array,
all the array elements are now zero.
So let's get back to see what
we can do to have the compiler
help us, so we don't change
an array we don't want to.
We can define function
parameters as const parameters.
This tells the compiler that these parameters
are read-only within the function body.
Any attempt to modify them will
result in a compiler error.
So in this case notice
that we included the const
keyword right before the
array parameter declaration.
That's it.
Now if I try to modify any
array element as i do in
the assignment statement, a
compiler error will occur.
Depending on your compiler, the error
message will say something like error
trying to assign to a read-only value.
The idea of passing the location
of a variable to a function
instead of the value of a variable
is fundamental in understanding
the next topic we'll talk about,
it's called pass by reference.
Before we talk about pass by
reference, I want to be sure that
you really understand the whole
idea of passing arrays to functions.
So I'm in the IDE and I'm in
the section 11 workspace, the
arrays and functions project.
And let me show you
what I've got here.
Let's start at the main.
I've got a real simple array here,
array of integers called my scores,
and I've initialized it to 100 98
90 86 and 84, right 5 integers.
Now what I want to do is i want
to call a function called print
array, and i want to pass into that
function the array and the size
of the array, as we saw before.
Perfect.
That should print out
100 98 90 86 and 84.
Now I've got a function
called set array.
And what this function
will do is it'll set every
value of that array to 100.
So when i come back, it'll print
out 100 five times, so that
will actually modify the array.
So let's see what these
functions look like.
They're pretty straightforward.
There are the function prototypes.
That's the function
prototype for print array.
It expects an array of integers
and the size of the array.
The set array function expects an
array of integers, the size of the
array and the value that we want to
set each one of those elements to.
All right, so let's look at
the print array and I put const
here because it's something
that we need to think about.
Whenever we write functions
that work with arrays.
So let's look at this.
What do we do here?
Well, we iterate.
We iterate for I equal to 0.
While I is less than size, that's
the the idiom that we do all
the time when we're working with
arrays, and we're incrementing by 1.
And then all I'm doing is
I'm outputting array sub-I.
So I'm going to go from array sub-0,
array sub-1, array sub-2, all the
way to array sub-4, in this case.
And I'm going to print out
each one of those integers.
Then I'm just going to
print a new line at the end.
That will print out
100 98 90 86 and 84.
Perfect. So that's that line right here.
Then I'm going to call set
array, and I'm going to pass
in, again, the array, the 5,
which is the size and 100.
In this case, rather than doing any
outputting, what I want to do is
I want to loop through that array
again, so the same loop from I
equals 0, I less than size by one.
What I want to do at each
iteration of the loop is I
want to set arr sub-I, right.
The Ith element of that array
to the value that was passed in.
So in this case, I'm modifying
all five of the array integers to
100, then I'm printing it again.
So what I expect from this program
is the first print array statement is
going to print 100 98 90 86 and 84.
Then the last print array statement
here is going to print five 100s.
Okay, so let's run this, and then
we'll walk through this in detail so
you can see exactly what's going on.
There you go 100 98 90 86 84, and
then 500, exactly what we expected.
So let's walk through this.
Let's start with the print
array function first.
And my main has that array
right here called my scores.
And I'm going to draw this
visually, so you can see
exactly what's going on.
There's my scores.
It's an array of five integers.
Okay, and I'll put them in
here: 100 98 90 86 and 84.
The value of the name of an
array is the location of that
first element in the array.
So let's say that that integer
100 here is at location 2000.
And I'm just making that up,
it could be any location.
That's 2000.
So whenever the c++ compiler
sees an array name, this
is what it's going at.
In this case, my scores
will evaluate to 2000.
Okay, perfect.
So now I'm going to call print array
right here, this is what's going on.
So now I'm in my print array function.
And print array has
several local variables.
It's got array, it's got size,
and it's got this I right there.
Let's just worry about the array
and the size variables right now.
So there's my arr, I'll
just call it array.
And here's my size.
When the function is called,
the values are copied.
So my scores is 2000, it's not
the entire array, it's 2000.
So 2000 gets copied over here.
Size is the 5.
So size gets the 5, right.
Now I start looping.
And the first thing I do is it says
I'm -- basically, I is zero right.
So what I'm going to do is
I'm going to cout arr sub-0.
Well, what does that mean?
That means the first
integer in the array.
Well, where's the array, right here.
That's that guy, right there.
So you can see that this print
array function is referring to
the actual array in main because
the array was never copied.
Instead, the address of
the array was passed in.
It's going to go through each
one of these through the loop.
It's going to print out arr sub-1,
which is that guy right there 98.
So it's going to display them all.
Okay, that makes sense.
I hope so.
So so again, this will print out
right here, it'll display 100 98,
just like we saw, 90 86 and 84.
Now let's look at this
function call right here.
I still have my my scores
array and it's still the same.
I haven't changed it.
And let me put those
numbers back in here.
I'll put 100 in here
98 90 86 and 84, right.
Now I call set array.
Well, set array is over here,
and it's got same idea, right.
It's got the arr variable,
the size and the value.
So it's got arr, it's got
size and it's got value.
Let's again assume that
this is address 2000 right
here that's that name.
So in this case, I'm passing in
the 2000, I'm passing in 5 for
size and I'm passing in the 100 for
the value, and then I'm looping.
And notice that loop.
Every time in the loop, this
is what I'm doing right here.
So the first time through I'm saying
arr sub-0 is value which is 100.
It's always going to be 100.
Well, where is arr
sub-0, it's at 2000.
So what i just did was I just
came in here and put 100 in here.
Then I'm going to increment I and
it becomes arr sub-1 equals 100.
So this guy is over here.
I just got rid of that one.
And what I'm doing is I'm
initializing the entire array
to whatever value was passed in,
which is 100 in this case, right.
When this function is
finished, it's gone.
And what I'm left with
is the updated array.
So this will print
out 5 100s as you saw.
Okay, so hopefully, that makes sense.
It's a real different
from pass by value.
But when you think about it, it is
still doing pass by value because
it's copying the value of 2000, right.
It's not copying the entire
array but it's copying 2000,
which is what my score is
defaults to, that's its value.
All right, so one last thing.
We really don't want to be able to
change that array in the print array.
Let's say that we did something
like this something really silly
we could say arr sub-0 is 10,000.
Well, you know what let's see 50,000.
Just so that we could
really see the difference.
Okay, this is probably a bug.
Okay, print functions don't
tend to change anything.
They just display information.
But let's just say that we've
got some bug in our code.
Now right here, I'll
call print array again.
And I'll call it exactly the
same with my scores and 5.
So look what happened here.
I called print array here.
It printed out the 5 100s.
But then it changed one of
them, the first one to 50,000.
And then I'm calling it again.
So I'm expecting to see
that first, there it is.
You see it.
That first array element right
there just got changed to 50,000.
How do i prevent that.
Real easy way to prevent that is
to come up to your print array
math function right here, and say
that this is a constant array.
And I can do the same
thing in the definition.
Now if you try to compile this,
there's the error assignment
of read-only location arr.
So in other words, this function
now print array cannot change array.
That's really what we want.
So we can comment that out.
And now we'll run just fine.
Oka, notice that's
exactly what we want.
So when you're writing functions
and they're passing around objects,
especially arrays and vectors and
things like that, especially when
we talk about pass by reference in
the next section, you've got to be
really aware of what can change what.
And if you do have access to
the actual and you don't want to
change it, const is the way to go.
Okay, we'll talk more about that
when we talk about pass by reference.